# Computational thinking definition

From [Wikipedia on Computational thinking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_thinking):

> In education, computational thinking (CT) is a set of problem-solving methods 
that involve expressing problems and their solutions in ways that a computer 
could also execute.[1] It involves automation of processes, but also using 
computing to explore, analyze, and understand processes (natural and 
artificial).[2][3][4]

> Preceded by terms like algorithmizing, procedural thinking, algorithmic 
thinking, and computational literacy[2] by computing pioneers like Alan Perlis 
and Donald Knuth, the term computational thinking was first used by Seymour 
Papert in 1980[7] and again in 1996.[8] Computational thinking can be used to 
algorithmically solve complicated problems of scale, and is often used to 
realize large improvements in efficiency.[9]


# Computational thinking studies with phenomenography, computer science

[Semantic Scholar: "computational thinking" "variation theory" phenomenography, limited to computer science](https://www.semanticscholar.org/search?fos%5B0%5D=computer-science&q=%22computational%20thinking%22%20%22variation%20theory%22%20phenomenography&sort=relevance)

Yields the following results (the following subsections).

## Threshold capabilities: threshold concepts and knowledge capability linked through variation theory

From the abstract of [Threshold capabilities: threshold concepts and knowledge 
capability linked through variation theory](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10734-012-9540-5):

> The Threshold Capability Integrated Theoretical Framework (TCITF) is 
presented as a framework for the design of university curricula, aimed at 
developing graduates’ capability to deal with previously unseen situations in 
their professional, social, and personal lives. The TCITF is a new theoretical 
framework derived from, and heavily dependent upon, the ideas of the Threshold 
Concepts Framework (Meyer and Land 2003a; Land et al. 2006) and Capability 
Theory (Bowden and Marton 1998; Bowden et al. 2000; Bowden 2004). Capability 
theory is firmly based in phenomenography and variation theory, is concerned 
with the development of knowledge capability, but has had limited application 
in practice. The threshold concepts framework has enjoyed greater acceptance by 
a large range of academics in many fields. This acceptance has initially 
focussed on analytic studies of what constitutes a threshold concept—and the 
location and distribution of such concepts—in a given domain. In many instances 
subsequent attention has focussed on issues of pedagogy and assessment, 
including the design of curricula. We propose a merging of capability theory 
and the threshold concepts framework and argue that capability and variation 
theories provide the ideal mechanism for developing a strong pedagogical 
approach based on newly emerging knowledge of the critical features of 
threshold concepts within different domains.

This paper is not directly related to computational thinking. Rather, it is a 
paper on general design of education. That it should be capability oriented. 
It's purpose is to make the entire education prepare for the unknown.

## Analysis of Students’ learning of computer programming in a computer laboratory context

From the abstract of [Analysis of Students’ learning of computer programming in 
a computer laboratory context](https://doi.org/10.1080/03043797.2018.1544609):

> Previous research shows that many students find it difficult to learn 
computer programming. To learn computer programming includes both gaining 
theoretical understanding and learning to develop programmes in practice. To 
this end, teachers commonly design programming exercises for the students in 
the computer laboratory. To be able to improve the process of designing such 
exercises, there is a need of a more detailed understanding of the interaction 
between learning of theory and learning of practice in laboratory sessions. In 
this paper, an approach for investigating this interaction is proposed. 
Theoretically, the approach is based on phenomenography and variation theory. 
To illustrate the approach, it is demonstrated in detail how it was applied to 
a small but rich case of empirical data from a computer laboratory session. The 
main result presented here is the new approach for analysing data. In addition, 
the results of the case study shed preliminary light on the interaction between 
learning of practice and learning of theory when students work with programming 
assignments in the laboratory.

## What is it Possible to Learn? On Variation as a Necessary Condition for Learning

From the abstract of [What is it Possible to Learn? On Variation as a Necessary 
Condition for Learning](https://doi.org/10.1080/00313830600823753):

> A recent development of phenomenography, variation theory, is illustrated 
using a video recorded case of learning. From a variation theory perspective, 
to learn is to be aware of critical aspects of what is learned. The way we 
experience or understand something depends on what aspects we are aware of and 
can discern simultaneously. The possibility for the learner to discern and 
focus on these aspects is critical for learning. But we can only discern an 
aspect if we experience a variation in that aspect. Thus the possibility of 
experiencing variation in critical aspects is a necessary condition for 
learning. Variation theory is proposed to be a powerful means for describing 
and revealing conditions critical for learning in a pedagogical setting.

## What Does It Take to Do Computer Programming?: Surveying the K-12 Students' Conceptions

From the abstract of [What Does It Take to Do Computer Programming?: Surveying 
the K-12 Students' Conceptions](https://doi.org/10.1145/2676723.2677229):

> Phenomenographic studies in computing education research have previously 
focused on learning "programming thinking" [3], the act of learning to program 
[2], and conceptions of learning generally in an engineering context [10]. In 
the present study we analyze and discuss "what it takes to do computer 
programming" using phenomenography as research approach. This study is based on 
a large survey dataset gathered in summer outreach courses for K-12 students. 
The analysis resulted in 12 qualitatively different categories belonging to 
five separate, emergent themes: Syntax and language features, nature of 
programming work generally, computational thinking and problem solving, 
prerequisites, and auxiliary skills. We additionally reviewed whether the 
students' previous experience explains the categories, and observed that a 
mechanistic view of programming was prevailing among the inexperienced users, 
while experienced students more often stressed algorithmic thinking and logical 
reasoning. This study resembles work done by Eckerdal et al. [3], but gives a 
K-12 perspective to the question, "what does it takes to do programming?"

This seems like a relevant paper. There is not that much difference between 12 
and HE, at least not at KTH.

